# Module 2: Exploring Big Data
# Lab: Exploring big data

### Scenario
Now that you are familiar with the raw structure of the data, your next task is to convert the totality of the data into a format that you can use for subsequent analysis. The data comprises a number of CSV files, and you must convert them into a single XDF object. You also need to tidy up the data a little—filter some observations and variables to eliminate data that you might not be interested in, combine some columns, and perform some calculations over the results to convert the data into a more useful set of data that you can use later in your investigations.

### Objectives
In this lab, you will:
-   Import data held in a CSV file into an XDF object and compare the performance of operations using these formats.
-   Combine multiple CSV files into a single XDF object and transform data as it is imported.
-   Combine data retrieved from SQL Server into an XDF file.
-   Refactor XDF data and generate summaries.

### Lab Setup
Estimated Time: 60 minutes
Username: **Adatum\\AdatumAdmin**
Password: **Pa55w.rd**

Before starting this lab, ensure that the following VMs are all running, and then complete the steps below:
-   MT17B-WS2016-NAT
-   20773A-LON-DC
-   20773A-LON-DEV
-   20773A-LON-RSVR
-   20773A-LON-SQLR


01.  Log in to the LON-DEV VM as **AdatumAdmin** with the password **Pa55w.rd**.
02.  Click Start, type **Microsoft SQL Server Management Studio**, and then press Enter.
03.  In the **Connect to Server** dialog box, log in to **LON-SQLR** using Windows authentication.
04.  In Object Explorer, right-click **Databases**, and then click **New Database**.
05.  In the **New Database** dialog box, in the **Database name** box, type **AirlineData**, and then click **OK**.
06.  Close SQL Server Management Studio.
07.  Start your R development environment of choice (Visual Studio® or RStudio).
08.  Open the R script **E:\\Demofiles\\Mod02\\importAirports.R**.
09.  Run the script.
10.  Close your R development environment, without saving any changes.

## Exercise 1: Importing and transforming CSV data

### Scenario
You have decided to import a CSV file containing airline delay data for the year 2000 into an XDF file. You can then compare the size and performance of using this XDF file to the original CSV file.

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:
1. Import the data for the year 2000
2. Compare the performance of the data files

#### Task 1: Import the data for the year 2000
1.  Log in to the **LON-DEV** VM as **Adatum\\AdatumAdmin** with the password **Pa55w.rd**.
2.  Start your R development environment of choice (Visual Studio Tools, or RStudio), and create a new R file.
3.  The data is located in the file **2000.csv**, in the folder **E:\\Labfiles\\Lab02**. Set your current working directory to this folder.
4.  Import the first 10 rows of the data file into a data frame and examine its structure. Note the type of each column.
5.  Create a vector named **flightDataColumns** that you can use as the **colClasses** argument to **rxImport**. This vector should specify that the following columns are factors:
 -   Year
 -   DayofMonth
 -   DayOfWeek
 -   UniqueCarrier
 -   Origin
 -   Dest
 -   Cancelled
 -   Diverted
6.  Import the data into an XDF file named **2000.xdf**. If this file already exists, overwrite it. Use the **flightDataColumns** vector to ensure that the specified columns are imported as factors.
7.  When the data has been imported, examine the first 10 rows of the new file and check the structure of this new file.
8.  Use File Explorer to compare the relative sizes of the CSV and the XDF files.

#### Task 2: Compare the performance of the data files
1.  Return to your R environment.
2.  Use the **rxSummary** function to generate a summary of all the numeric fields in the **2000.csv** file, and then repeat using the **2000.xdf** file. Compare the timings by using the **system.time** function.
3.  Use the **rxCrossTabs** function to generate a cross-tabulation of the data in the CSV file showing the number of flights that were cancelled and not cancelled each month. Note that the **Month** and the **Cancelled** columns are both numerics, but dependent variables referenced by a formula in **rxCrossTabs** must be factors. You use the **as.factor** function to cast these variables to factors. Display the cancellation values as TRUE/FALSE values. Note how long the process takes.
4.  Generate the same cross-tabulation for the XDF file, and compare the timing with that for the CSV file.
5.  Repeat the previous two steps, but generate cubes over the CSV and XDF data using the **rxCube** function rather than crosstabs. Compare the timings.
6.  Tidy up the workspace and remove the **flightDataSample**, **flightDataSampleXDF**, **csvDelaySummary**, **xdfDelaySummary**, **csvCrossTabInfo**, **xdfCrossTabInfo**, **csvCubeInfo**, and **xdfCubeInfo** variables.

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have created a new XDF file containing the airline delay data for the year 2000, and you will have performed some operations to test its performance.

## Exercise 2: Combing and transforming data

### Scenario
You have been provided with a set of CSV files containing flight delay data for the years 2000 through 2008. You need to create a single XDF file from this data. You also decide to create a new column named Delay that contains the sum of all the delay reasons from each observation. You want to add a factor that contains the month name rather than using the numeric month number. This process will require more resources than are available on your desktop computer using R client, so you decide to perform these tasks on a more powerful R server cluster.

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:
1. Copy the data files to R Server
2. Create a remote session
3. Import the flight delay data to an XDF file

#### Task 1: Copy the data files to R Server
-   On the LON-DEV VM, and copy the following files from the **E:\\Labfiles\\Lab02** folder to the **\\\\LON-RSVR\\Data** share:
 -   2000.csv
 -   2001.csv
 -   2002.csv
 -   2003.csv
 -   2004.csv
 -   2005.csv
 -   2006.csv
 -   2007.csv
 -   2008.csv

#### Task 2: Create a remote session
1.  Return to your R environment.
2.  Start a remote session on the LON-RSVR VM. When prompted, specify the username **admin**, and the password **Pa55w.rd**.
3.  At the **REMOTE\>** prompt, temporarily pause the remote session and return to the local session running on the LON-DEV VM.
4.  Use the **putLocalObject** function to copy the local object, **flightDataColumns**, to the remote session.
5.  Resume the remote session.
6.  Verify that the **flightDataColumns** variable is now available in the remote session.

#### Task 3: Import the flight delay data to an XDF file
1.  Use the **rxImport** to import a test sample of 1,000 rows from the **2000.csv** file into a file named **2000.xdf**. Save the 2000.xdf file to the **\\\\LON-RSVR\\Data** share. Perform the following transformations as you import the data:
 -   Create a **Delay** column that sums the values in the **ArrDelay**, **DepDelay**, **CarrierDelay**, **WeatherDelay**, **NASDelay**, **SecurityDelay**, and **LateAircraftDelay** columns. Note that, apart from the **ArrDelay** and **DepDelay** columns, this data can contain **NA** values that you should convert to 0 first.
 -   Add a column named **MonthName** that holds the month name derived from the month number. This column must be a **factor**.
 -   Filter out all cancelled flights (flights where the Cancelled column contains 1).
 -   Remove the variables **FlightNum**, **TailNum**, and **CancellationCode** from the dataset.
2.  Examine the first few rows of the XDF file to verify the results.
3.  Delete the XDF file from the **\\\\LON-RSVR\\Data** share.
4.  Import all the CSV files in the **\\\\LON-RSVR\\Data** share into an XDF file called FlightDelayData.xdf. Perform the same transformations from step 1, and save the file to the **\\\\LON-RSVR\\Data** share. Note that this process can take some time—you should enable progress reports for the **rxImport** operation so you have confirmation that it is working. You might also find that setting the number of rows per read can impact performance. Try setting this value to 500,000, which will create chunk sizes of approximately half a million rows.
5.  Close the remote session.

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have created a new XDF file containing the cumulative airline delay data for the years 2000 through 2008, and you will have performed some transformations on this data.

## Exercise 3: Incorporating data from SQL Server into an XDF file

### Scenario
The flight delay data includes codes for the origin and destination of each flight (these are international IATA codes), but does not specify in which state each airport is located. You have access to a SQL Server database that contains a separate list of airport IATA codes and their locations, including the state. You need to retrieve this information from SQL Server and incorporate it into the flight delay XDF file.

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:
1. Import the SQL Server data
2. Add state information to the flight delay XDF data

#### Task 1: Import the SQL Server data
1.  Use a trusted connection to create an **RxSqlServerData** data source that connects to the **Airports** table in the **AirlineData** database on the **LON-SQLR** server.
2.  View the first few rows of data to establish the columns that it contains.
3.  Import the airport data into a small data, and then convert all string data to factors.
4.  View the first few rows of the data frame file to ensure that they contain the same data as the original SQL Server table.

#### Task 2: Add state information to the flight delay XDF data
1.  Start another remote session on the LON-RSVR VM. When prompted, specify the username **admin**, and the password **Pa55w.rd**.
2.  Temporarily pause the remote session and copy the data frame containing the airport information to the remote session. Use the **putLocalObject** function.
3.  Resume the remote session.
4.  Use the **rxImport** function to read the **FlightDelayData,xdf** file on the **\\\\LON-RSVR\\Data** share and add the following variables:
 -   **OriginState**. This should contain the state from the data frame you created in the previous task where the IATA code in that data frame matches the **Origin** variable in the XDF file.
 -   **DestState**. This is very similar, except it should match the IATA code in the data frame against the **Dest** variable in the XDF file.
Save the result as **EnhancedFlightDelayData.xdf** in the **\\\\LON-RSRV\\Data** share.
Note that you must use the **transformObjects** argument of **rxImport** to make the data frame accessible to the transformation.
5.  View the first few rows of the XDF file to ensure that they contain the **OriginState** and **DestState** variables.
6.  Stay connected to the remote session.

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have augmented the flight delay data with the state in which the origin and destination airports are located.

## Exercise 4: Refactoring data and generating summaries

### Scenario
Now that you have imported the flight delay data and included the information that you require, you want to start analyzing the data and determine which factors might be influential in causing flight delays. You theorize that delays might be a function of the origin and/or destination airport and state for a flight, so you decide to examine the delay statistics broken down by these factors.

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:
1. Examine delay intervals by airport and state
2. Summarize delay intervals by airport and state

#### Task 1: Examine delay intervals by airport and state
1.  The **Delay** variable is a continuous value. You determine that it would be more useful to group the delay times into the following series of intervals:
 -   No delay
 -   Up to 30 minutes
 -   30 minutes to 1 hour
 -   1 to 2 hours
 -   2 to 3 hours
 -   More than 3 hours
In the remote session, generate four cross-tabulations (using **rxCrossTabs**) that report the delay intervals by origin airport, destination airport, origin state, and destination state. Use a transformation with each cross-tabulation to factorize the delays as described.
2.  Display the results.
3.  Close the remote session, and return to the local session on the LON-DEV VM.

#### Task 2: Summarize delay intervals by airport and state
1.  The cross-tabulations are probably still too detailed to enable you to draw any conclusions with plotting the data graphically. Instead, you decide to quickly calculate the mean delay by airport and state to see whether there are any notable variations. This requires using dplyrXdf, so you should build and install the dplyrXdf package.
2.  Create an **RxXdfDataSource** that references the following variables in the XDF file. These are the only variables that the analysis will require:
 -   Delay
 -   Origin
 -   Dest
 -   OriginState
 -   DestState
3.  Use the data accessible through the data source to calculate the mean delay for each origin airport, sort the results, and then display them. Use a dplyrXdf pipeline. You will need to persist the final results, otherwise they will be deleted automatically by the pipeline.
4.  Repeat the previous step to calculate and display the mean delay for each destination airport.
5.  Repeat step 3 to calculate and display the mean delay by origin state.
6.  Repeat step 3 to calculate and display the mean delay by destination state.
7.  Save the script as **Lab2Script.R** in the **E:\\Labfiles\\Lab02** folder, and close your R development environment.

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have examined flight delays by origin and destination airport and state.

**Question**: What is the most common arrival delay (in minutes), and how frequently does this delay occur?

**Question**: Which month has the most delays caused by poor weather? Which months have the least delays caused by poor weather?

©2017 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode), additional terms may apply. All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are **not** included within the Creative Commons license grant. This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided "as-is." Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.
