# Module 7: Creating and Evaluating Partitioning Models
# Lab: Creating a partitioning model to make predictions

### Scenario
In addition to departure times, you suspect that flight delays might also be caused by factors that are dependent on the interactions between variables, such as the day of the week, the month of the year, the carrier, and the departure or arrival airport. This could be due to regular fluctuations in the business pattern of the working week, seasonal weather conditions, or contractual or political reasons. Perhaps an airport has a bias to prefer flights made by one carrier over another, and will allocate resources such as gate slots, loading and unloading facilities, and refueling stations more readily. You decide to create partitioning models to test this hypothesis.

### Objectives
In this lab, you will:
-   Create a DTree partitioning model using the departure time, arrival time, month, and day of the week as predictor variables, and use this model to predict delay times.
-   Create a DForest model to see how this affects the quality of the predictions made.
-   Create another DTree model based on a different set of predictor variables.
-   Create a further DTree model that combines the variables from the previous models to judge the effects on the accuracy of the predictions.

### Lab Setup
Estimated Time: 90 minutes
Username: **Adatum\\AdatumAdmin**
Password: **Pa55w.rd**

Before you start this lab, ensure that the following VMs are all running:
-   MT17B-WS2016-NAT
-   20773A-LON-DC
-   20773A-LON-DEV
-   20773A-LON-RSVR
-   20773A-LON-SQLR

## Exercise 1: Fitting a DTree model and making predictions

### Scenario
Initially, you decide to focus on the day of the week and month, in addition to the departure and arrival times, to see what these factors taken together can tell you about flight delays. You use a DTree model to generate a set of predictions that you can use as a comparison with other models, and with decision trees constructed using additional variables.

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:
1. Copy the data to the shared folder
2. Split the data into test and training datasets
3. Create the DTree model
4. Make predictions using the DTree model

#### Task 1: Copy the data to the shared folder
1.  Log on to the LON-DEV VM as **Adatum\\AdatumAdmin** with the password **Pa55w.rd**.
2.  Copy the FlightDelayData.xdf file from the **E:\\Labfiles\\Lab07** folder to the **\\\\LON-RSVR\\Data** shared folder.

#### Task 2: Split the data into test and training datasets
1.  Start your R development environment of choice (Visual Studio, or RStudio), and create a new R file.
2.  Create a remote session on the LON-RSVR server. This is another VM running R Server. Use the following parameters to the **remoteLogin** function:
    - deployr\_endpoint: **http://LON-RSVR.ADATUM.COM:12800**
    - session: **TRUE**
    - diff: **TRUE**
    - commandLine: **TRUE**
    - username: **admin**
    - password: **Pa55w.rd**
3.  Transform the contents of the flight delay data file as follows:
    - Convert the **DepTime** and **ArrTime** variables from character to numeric.
    - Add a factor variable named **DataSet** that contains the value **"train"** or **"test"**, selected at random; 95 percent of the observations should be marked as "train", and the remaining 5 percent marked as "test".
    - Retain the variables **Delay**, **Origin**, **Month**, **DayOfWeek**, **DepTime**, **ArrTime**, **Dest**, **Distance**, **UnqiueCarrier**, **OriginState**, and **DestState** from the original dataset. Discard the other variables.
    - Save the new dataset in a file named **\\\\LON-RSVR\\Data\\PartitionedFlightDelayData.xdf**.
4.  Split the data in the **PartitionedFlightDelayData**.xdf file into separate test and training files using the **DataSet** field.
5.  Verify the number of observations in each file. The training file should contain 19 times more observations than the test file.

#### Task 3: Create the DTree model
1.  Fit a DTree model to the training data. Do not limit the number of levels in the DTree. Use the following formula:
    ```
	Delay ~ DepTime + ArrTime + Month + DayOfWeek
    ```
2.  Examine the model and note the complex interplay between the variables that drive the decisions made. If time allows, copy the DTree object to the local session running on R Client and use the **RevoTreeView** package to step through the model. Return to the R Server session when you have finished.
3.  Use the **plotcp** function to generate a scree plot of the tree. Notice how the large number of branches adds complexity, but does not necessarily improve the decision making process; this is an overfit model.
4.  Examine the **cptable** field in the model to ascertain the point of overfit—it will probably be around seven levels of branching.
5.  Prune the tree back to seven levels.

#### Task 4: Make predictions using the DTree model
1.  Extract a data frame from the test dataset that contains only the predictor variables **DepTime**, **ArrTime**, **Month**, and **DayOfWeek**.
2.  Run predictions against the variables in the data frame using the DTree model.
3.  Summarize the results of the **Delay\_Pred** variable in the predictions. Compare the statistics of the **Delay** variable in the test dataset with these values. How close are the **mean** values of both datasets?
4.  Merge the predicted values for **Delay\_Pred** into a copy of the test dataset (not the data frame). Perform a **oneToOne** merge.
5.  Analyze the results and answer the following questions.

>**Note:** You might find it useful to write the code that performs this analysis as a function because you will be repeating it several times over different sets of predictions in subsequent exercises.

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have constructed a DTree model, made predictions using this model, and evaluated the accuracy of these predictions.

**Question:** How many predicted delays were within 10 minutes of the actual reported delays? What proportion of the observations is this?

**Question:** How many predicted delays were within 5 percent of the actual delays?

**Question:** How many predicted delays were within 10 percent of the actual delays?

**Question:** How many predicted delays were within 50 percent of the actual delays?

## Exercise 2: Fitting a DForest model and making predictions

### Scenario
Having established a baseline set of predictions using a DTree model, you decide to repeat the process using a DForest model to see how the predictions change. You will use the same training and test datasets as before.

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:
1. Create the DForest model
2. Make predictions using the DForest model
3. Test whether overfitting of the model is an issue

#### Task 1: Create the DForest model
-   Fit a DForest model to the training data. Use the same formula as before. Restrict the depth of the trees in the forest to seven levels.

#### Task 2: Make predictions using the DForest model
1.  Generate predictions for the delay times against the DForest model. Use the same data frame containing the test data that you constructed in the previous exercise.
Merge the predicted values into a copy of the test data frame. Perform a **oneToOne** merge.
Analyze the results and answer the following questions.

**Question:** How many predicted delays were within 10 minutes of the actual reported delays? What proportion of the observations is this? How does this compare to the predictions made using the DTree model?

**Question:** How many predicted delays were within 5 percent of the actual delays? How does this compare to the predictions made using the DTree model?

**Question:** How many predicted delays were within 10 percent of the actual delays? How does this compare to the predictions made using the DTree model?

**Question:** How many predicted delays were within 50 percent of the actual delays? How does this compare to the predictions made using the DTree model?

**Question:** Was the DForest model more accurate at predicting delays than the DTree model? What conclusions can you draw?

#### Task 3: Test whether overfitting of the model is an issue
-   Repeat the previous two tasks but set the maximum depth of the trees in the DForest to 5, analyze the results, and then answer the following questions.

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have constructed a DTree model, made predictions using this model, and evaluated the accuracy of these predictions.

**Question:** Was the DForest model with a reduced depth more or less accurate than the previous model? What conclusion to you reach?

## Exercise 3: Fitting a DTree model with different variables

### Scenario
You now decide to see whether factors such as the origin, destination, airline, and flight distance have any bearing on delay times—you elect to construct another model using these variables.

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:
1. Create the new DTree model
2. Make predictions using the new DTree model

#### Task 1: Create the new DTree model
-   Fit a DTree model to the training data. Restrict the depth of the tree to seven levels. Use the following formula:
    ```
	Delay ~ Origin + Dest + Distance + UniqueCarrier + OriginState + DestState
    ```

#### Task 2: Make predictions using the new DTree model
1.  Extract a data frame from the test dataset that contains only the predictor variables **Origin**, **Dest**, **Distance**, **UniqueCarrier**, **OriginState**, and **DestState**.
2.  Generate predictions for the delay times against the new DTree model. Use the data frame containing the test data that you just constructed.
3.  Merge the predicted values into a copy of the test data frame. Perform a **oneToOne** merge.
4.  Analyze the results and answer the following question.

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have constructed a DTree model using a different set of variables, made predictions using this model, and compared these predictions to those made using the earlier DTree model.

**Question:** How do the predictions made using the new set of predictor variables compare to the previous set? What are your conclusions?

## Exercise 4: Fitting a DTree model with a combined set of variables

### Scenario
You have decided to construct one final model that includes all of the variables used previously. You will then see whether including all of these variables improves the accuracy of delay predictions.

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:
1. Create the DTree model
2. Make predictions using the DTree model

#### Task 1: Create the DTree model
-   Fit a DTree model to the training data. Restrict the depth of the tree to seven levels. Use the following formula:
    ```
	Delay ~ DepTime + Month + DayOfWeek + ArrTime + Origin + Dest + Distance + UniqueCarrier + OriginState + DestState
    ```

#### Task 2: Make predictions using the DTree model
1.  Extract a data frame from the test dataset that contains all of the variables except **Delay**.
2.  Generate predictions for the delay times against the DTree model. Use the data frame containing the test data that you just constructed.
3.  Merge the predicted values into a copy of the test data frame. Perform a **oneToOne** merge.
4.  Analyze the results and answer the following question.

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have constructed a DTree model combining the variables used in the two earlier DTree models, and made predictions using this model.

**Question:** What do the results of this model show about the accuracy of the predictions?

©2017 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode), additional terms may apply. All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are **not** included within the Creative Commons license grant. This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided "as-is." Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.