# Module 7: Creating and Evaluating Partitioning Models
# Lab: Creating a partitioning model to make predictions

## Exercise 1: Fitting a DTree model and making predictions

#### Task 1: Copy the data to the shared folder
1.  Log on to the LON-DEV VM as **Adatum\\AdatumAdmin** with the password **Pa55w.rd**.
2.  Open a command prompt window.
3.  Run the following commands:
    ```
	net use \\LON-RSVR\Data
	copy E:\Labfiles\Lab07\FlightDelayData.xdf \\LON-RSVR\Data
    ```
4.  If the **Overwrite** message appears, type **y**, and then press Enter
5.  Verify that the file is copied successfully, and then close the command prompt

#### Task 2: Split the data into test and training datasets
1.  Start your R development environment of choice (Visual Studio, or RStudio), and create a new R file.
2.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This statement creates a remote R session on the LON-RSVR server:
    ```
	remoteLogin(deployr_endpoint = "http://LON-RSVR.ADATUM.COM:12800", session = TRUE, diff = TRUE, commandline = TRUE, username = "admin", password = "Pa55w.rd")
    ```
3.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code transforms the flight delay data with a new variable named **DataSet** that indicates whether an observation should be used for testing or training models. The code also removes the variables not required by the models:
    ```
    flightDelayDataFile <- "\\\\LON-RSVR\\Data\\FlightDelayData.xdf"
    flightDelayData <- RxXdfData(flightDelayDataFile)
    partitionedFlightDelayDataFile <- "\\\\LON-RSVR\\Data\\PartitionedFlightDelayData.xdf"
    flightData <- rxDataStep(inData = flightDelayData,
    outFile = partitionedFlightDelayDataFile, overwrite = TRUE,
    transforms = list(
    DepTime = as.numeric(DepTime),
    ArrTime = as.numeric(ArrTime),
    Dataset = factor(ifelse(runif(.rxNumRows) >= 0.05, "train", "test"))),
    varsToKeep = c("Delay", "Origin", "Month", "DayOfWeek", "DepTime", "ArrTime",
    "Dest", "Distance", "UniqueCarrier", "OriginState", "DestState"))
    ```
4.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code splits the data into two files based on the value of the **DataSet** variable:
    ```
    partitionFilesBaseName <- "\\\\LON-RSVR\\Data\\Partition"
    flightDataSets <- rxSplit(flightData, splitByFactor = "Dataset",
    outFilesBase = partitionFilesBaseName, overwrite = TRUE)
    ```
5.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This statement shows the number of observations in each file. There should be approximately 19 times more rows in the train file than the test file:
    ```
	lapply(flightDataSets, nrow)
    ```

#### Task 3: Create the DTree model
1.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This statement creates a DTree for predicting flight delays using the departure and arrival times, the month, and the day of the week. It fits the model using the training data:
    ```
	delayDTree <- rxDTree(formula = Delay ~ DepTime + ArrTime + Month + DayOfWeek,
	data = names(flightDataSets[2]))
    ```
2.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This statement displays the structure of the decision tree:
    ```
	delayDTree
    ```
3.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code switches back to the local R Client session and copies the decision tree. The code then uses the **createTreeView** function of the **RevoTreeView** package to visualize the DTree. The DTree should be displayed using Microsoft Edge:
    ```
    pause()
    getRemoteObject("delayDTree")
    library(RevoTreeView)
    plot(createTreeView(delayDTree))
    ```      
4.  Close Microsoft Edge, add the following code to the R file, and run it. This statement switches back to the session on the R Server:
    ```
    resume()
    ```
5.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code generates a scree plot of the DTree, and shows the complexity parameters table. You can see that the DTree has a lot of levels (more than 320), but only the first few make any significant decisions. The remaining levels are primarily concerned with making the model fit the data at a detailed level. This is classic overfit:
    ```
	plotcp(rxAddInheritance(delayDTree))
	delayDTree$cptable
    ```
6.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code prunes the DTree, and displays the amended complexity parameters table, which should now be much reduced:
    ```
	prunedDelayDTree <- prune.rxDTree(delayDTree, cp=1.36e-03) # Replace cp with the value for 7 levels
	prunedDelayDTree$cptable
    ```

#### Task 4: Make predictions using the DTree model
1.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code creates a data frame containing the variables from the test dataset required for making predictions:
    ```
	testData <- rxDataStep(names(flightDataSets[1]),
	varsToKeep = c("DepTime", "ArrTime", "Month", "DayOfWeek"))
    ```
2.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This statement runs predictions against the data frame using the DTree:
    ```
	predictData <- rxPredict(prunedDelayDTree, data = testData)
    ```
3.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code summarizes the statistics for the predicted delays and the actual delays for comparison purposes. The mean values should be close to each other, although the other statistics are likely to vary more widely:
    ```
	rxSummary(~Delay, data = names(flightDataSets[1]))
	rxSummary(~Delay_Pred, data = predictData)
    ```
4.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code merges the predicted delays into a copy of the test dataset:
    ```
	mergedDelayData <- rxMerge(inData1 = predictData,
	inData2 = names(flightDataSets[1]),
	type = "oneToOne")
    ```
5.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code defines a function that you will use for analyzing the results of the predictions against the real data value:
    ```
    processResults <- function(inputData, minuteRange) {
    # Calculate the accuracy between the actual and predicted delays. How many are within 'minuteRange' minutes of each other
    results <- rxDataStep(inputData,
    transforms = list(Accuracy = factor(abs(Delay_Pred - Delay) <= minuteRange)),
    transformObjects = list(minuteRange = minuteRange))
    print(head(results, 100))
    # How accurate are the predictions? How many are within 'minuteRange' minutes?
    matches <- table(results$Accuracy)[2]
    percentage <- (matches / nrow(results)) * 100
    print(sprintf("%d predictions were within %d minutes of the actual delay time. This is %f percent of the total", matches, minuteRange, percentage))
    # How many are within 5% of the minuteRange' minute range
    matches <- table(abs(results$Delay_Pred - results$Delay) / results$Delay <= 0.05)[2]
    percentage <- (matches / nrow(results)) * 100
    print(sprintf("%d predictions were within 5 percent of the actual delay time. This is %f percent of the total", matches, percentage))
    # How many are within 10%
    matches <- table(abs(results$Delay_Pred - results$Delay) / results$Delay <= 0.1)[2]
    percentage <- (matches / nrow(results)) * 100
    print(sprintf("%d predictions were within 10 percent of the actual delay time. This is %f percent of the total", matches, percentage))
    # How many are within 50%
    matches <- table(abs(results$Delay_Pred - results$Delay) / results$Delay <= 0.5)[2]
    percentage <- (matches / nrow(results)) * 100
    print(sprintf("%d predictions were within 50 percent of the actual delay time. This is %f percent of the total", matches, percentage))
    invisible(NULL)
    }
    ```
6.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This statement calls the **processResults** function to analyze the predictions and display the results:
    ```
	processResults(mergedDelayData, 10)
    ```

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have constructed a DTree model, made predictions using this model, and evaluated the accuracy of these predictions.

## Exercise 2: Fitting a DForest model and making predictions

#### Task 1: Create the DForest model
-   Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code fits a DForest model to the training data:
    ```
	delayDForest <- rxDForest(formula = Delay ~ DepTime + ArrTime + Month + DayOfWeek,
	data = names(flightDataSets[2]),
	maxDepth = 7)
    ```

#### Task 2: Make predictions using the DForest model
1.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code generates predictions for the test data using the DForest model:
    ```
	predictData <- rxPredict(delayDForest, data = testData)
    ```
2.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code merges the predictions into a copy of the test data frame:
    ```
	mergedDelayData <- rxMerge(inData1 = predictData,
	inData2 = names(flightDataSets[1]),
	type = "oneToOne")
    ```
3.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code uses the **processResults** function to analyze the predictions:
    ```
	processResults(mergedDelayData, 10)
    ```

#### Task 3: Test whether overfitting of the model is an issue
1.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code fits a DForest model with a maximum depth of five levels to the training data:
    ```
	delayDForest <- rxDForest(formula = Delay ~ DepTime + ArrTime + Month + DayOfWeek,
	data = names(flightDataSets[2]),
	maxDepth = 5)
    ```
2.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code generates predictions for the test data using the new DForest model:
    ```
	predictData <- rxPredict(delayDForest, data = testData)
    ```
3.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code merges the predictions into a copy of the test data frame:
    ```
	mergedDelayData <- rxMerge(inData1 = predictData,
	inData2 = names(flightDataSets[1]),
	type = "oneToOne")
    ```
4.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code uses the **processResults** function to analyze the predictions:
    ```
	processResults(mergedDelayData, 10)
    ```

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have constructed a DTree model, made predictions using this model, and evaluated the accuracy of these predictions.

## Exercise 3: Fitting a DTree model with different variables

#### Task 1: Create the new DTree model

-   Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code fits a DTree model with a formula referencing the origin, destination, distance, and airline to the training data:
    ```
    delayDTree2 <- rxDTree(formula = Delay ~ Origin + Dest +
    Distance + UniqueCarrier + OriginState + DestState,
    data = names(flightDataSets[2]),
    maxDepth = 7)
    ```

#### Task 2: Make predictions using the new DTree model
1.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code generates a data frame containing the test data:
    ```
	testData <- rxDataStep(names(flightDataSets[1]),
	varsToKeep = c("Origin", "Dest", "Distance", "UniqueCarrier", "OriginState", "DestState"))
    ```
2.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code generates predictions for the test data using the new DTree model:
    ```
	predictData <- rxPredict(delayDTree2, data = testData)
    ```
3.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code merges the predictions into a copy of the test data frame:
    ```
	mergedDelayData <- rxMerge(inData1 = predictData,
	inData2 = names(flightDataSets[1]),
	type = "oneToOne")
    ```
4.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code uses the **processResults** function to analyze the predictions:
    ```
	processResults(mergedDelayData, 10)
    ```

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have constructed a DTree model using a different set of variables, made predictions using this model, and compared these predictions to those made using the earlier DTree model.

## Exercise 4: Fitting a DTree model with a combined set of variables

#### Task 1: Create the DTree model
-   Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code fits a DTree model with a formula referencing the origin, destination, distance, and airline to the training data:
    ```
	delayDTree3 <- rxDTree(formula = Delay ~ DepTime + Month + DayOfWeek + ArrTime + Origin + Dest +
	Distance + UniqueCarrier + OriginState + DestState,
	data = names(flightDataSets[2]),
	maxDepth = 7)
    ```
#### Task 2: Make predictions using the DTree model
1.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code generates a data frame containing the test data:
    ```
	testData <- rxDataStep(names(flightDataSets[1]),
	varsToDrop = c("Delay"))
    ```
2.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code generates predictions for the test data using the new DTree model:
    ```
	predictData <- rxPredict(delayDTree3, data = testData)
    ```
3.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code merges the predictions into a copy of the test data frame:
    ```
	mergedDelayData <- rxMerge(inData1 = predictData,
	inData2 = names(flightDataSets[1]),
	type = "oneToOne")
    ```
4.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code uses the **processResults** function to analyze the predictions:
    ```
	processResults(mergedDelayData, 10)
    ```

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have constructed a DTree model combining the variables used in the two earlier DTree models, and made predictions using this model.

©2017 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode), additional terms may apply. All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are **not** included within the Creative Commons license grant. This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided "as-is." Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.