# Module 6: Creating and Evaluating Regression Models
# Lab: Creating and using a regression model

## Exercise 1: Clustering flight delay data

#### Task 1: Copy the data to the shared folder
1.  Log on to the LON-DEV VM as **Adatum\\AdatumAdmin** with the password **Pa55w.rd**.
2.  Open a command prompt window.
3.  Run the following commands:
    ```
	net use \\LON-RSVR\Data
	copy E:\Labfiles\Lab06\FlightDelayData.xdf \\LON-RSVR\Data
    ```
4.  If the **Overwrite** message appears, type **y**, and then press Enter.
5.  Verify that the file is copied successfully.

#### Task 2: Examine the relationship between flight delays and departure times
1.  Start your R development environment of choice (Visual Studio, or RStudio), and create a new R file.
2.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This statement creates a remote R session on the LON-RSVR server:
    ```
	remoteLogin(deployr_endpoint = "http://LON-RSVR.ADATUM.COM:12800", session = TRUE, diff = TRUE, commandline = TRUE, username = "admin", password = "Pa55w.rd")
    ```
3.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code creates a data file containing a random sample of 10 percent of the flight delay data:
    ```
	rxOptions(reportProgress = 1)
	flightDelayData = RxXdfData("\\\\LON-RSVR\\Data\\flightDelayData.xdf")
	sampleDataFile = "\\\\LON-RSVR\\Data\\flightDelayDatasample.xdf"
	flightDelayDataSample <- rxDataStep(inData = flightDelayData,
	outFile = sampleDataFile, overwrite = TRUE,
	rowSelection = rbinom(.rxNumRows, size = 1, prob = 0.10)
	)
    ```
4.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code displays a scatter plot with a regression line showing how flight delays vary with departure time throughout the day:
    ```
    rxLinePlot(formula = Delay~as.numeric(DepTime), data = flightDelayDataSample,
    type = c("p", "r"), symbolStyle = c("."),
    lineColor = "red",
    xlab = "Departure Time",
    ylab = "Delay (mins)",
    xlim = c(0, 2400), ylim = c(-120, 1000)
    )
    ```
5.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code creates an expression that you can use to factorize the departure times by hour:
    ```
    depTimeFactor <- expression(list(DepTime = cut(as.numeric(DepTime),
    breaks = c(0, 100, 200, 300, 400, 500, 600, 700, 800, 900, 1000, 1100,
    1200, 1300, 1400, 1500, 1600, 1700, 1800, 1900, 2000, 2100, 2200, 2300, 2400),
    labels = c("Midnight-1:00AM", "1:01-2:00AM", "2:01-3:00AM", "3:01-4:00AM", "4:01-5:00AM",
    "5:01-6:00 AM", "6:01-7:00AM", "7:01-8:00AM", "8:01-9:00AM", "9:01-10:00AM", "10:01-11:00AM",
    "11:01-Midday", "12:01-1:00PM", "1:01-2:00PM", "2:01-3:00PM", "3:01-4:00PM", "4:01-5:00PM",
    "5:01-6:00PM", "6:01-7:00PM", "7:01-8:00PM", "8:01-9:00PM", "9:01-10:00PM",
    "10:01-11:00PM", "11:01PM-Midnight"))))
    ```
6.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code generates a histogram showing the number of departures for each hour:
    ```
    rxHistogram(formula = ~DepTime, data = flightDelayDataSample,
    histType = "Counts",
    xlab = "Departure Time",
    ylab = "Number of Departures",
    transforms = depTimeFactor)
    ```

#### Task 3: Create clusters to model the flight delay data
1.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code creates a cluster model of 12 clusters, combining the **DepTime** and **Delay** variables in the sample data:
    ```
    delayCluster <- rxKmeans(formula = ~DepTime + Delay,
    data = flightDelayDataSample,
    transforms = list(DepTime = as.numeric(DepTime)),
    numClusters = 12
    )
    ```
2.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code calculates the ratio of the between clusters sums of squares and the total sums of squares for this model. The value returned should be in the high 80% to low 90% range:
    ```
	delayCluster$betweenss / delayCluster$totss
    ```
3.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code displays the cluster centers. There should be 12 rows, showing the value of **DepTime** and **Delay** used as the centroid values for each cluster:
    ```
	delayCluster$centers
    ```
4.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. These statements create a parallel compute context and register the RevoScaleR parallel back end with the **foreach** package:
    ```
    library(doRSR)
    registerDoRSR()
    # Maximize parallelism
    rxSetComputeContext(RxLocalParallel())
    ```
5.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This block of code runs a **foreach** loop to generate the cluster models and calculate the sums of squares ratio for each model:
    ```
    numClusters <- 12
    testClusters <- vector("list", numClusters)
    # Create the cluster models
    foreach (k = 1:numClusters) %dopar% {
    testClusters[[k]] <<- rxKmeans(formula = ~DepTime + Delay,
    data = flightDelayDataSample,
    transforms = list(DepTime = as.numeric(DepTime)),
    numClusters = k * 2
    )
    }
    ```
>**Note:** At the time of writing, there was still some instability in R Server running on Windows. Placing it under a high parallel load can cause it to close the remote session. If this step fails and returns to the local session on R Client, run the following code, and then repeat this step:
    ```
	resume()
	rxSetComputeContext(RxLocalSeq())
    ```
6.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This block of code calculates the sums of squares ratio for each model:
    ```
	ratio <- vector()
	for (cluster in testClusters)
	ratio <- c(ratio, cluster$betweenss / cluster$totss)
    ```
7.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code generates a scatter plot that shows the number of clusters on the X-axis and the sums of squares ratio on the Y-axis. The graph should suggest that the optimal number of clusters is 18. This is the point at which additional clusters add little value to the model:
    ```
	plotData <- data.frame(num = c(1:numClusters), ratio)
	rxLinePlot(ratio ~ num, plotData, type="p")
    ```

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have determined the optimal number of clusters to create, and built the appropriate cluster model.

## Exercise 2: Fitting a linear model to clustered data

#### Task 1: Create a linear regression model
-   Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code constructs a linear regression model, describing how delay varies with departure time, using the selected cluster model:
    ```
	k <- 9
	clusterModel <- rxLinMod(Delay ~ DepTime, data = as.data.frame(testClusters[[k]]$centers),
	covCoef = TRUE)
    ```

#### Task 2: Generate test data and make predictions
1.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code creates the test dataset:
    ```
    delayTestData <- rxDataStep(inData = flightDelayData,
    varsToKeep = c("DepTime", "Delay"),
    transforms = list(DepTime = as.numeric(DepTime)),
    rowSelection = rbinom(.rxNumRows, size = 1, prob = 0.01)
    )
    ```
2.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code makes predictions about delays in the test data using the linear model:
    ```
	delayPredictions <- rxPredict(clusterModel, data = delayTestData,
	computeStdErr = TRUE, interval = "confidence",
	writeModelVars = TRUE
	)
    ```
3.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code displays the first 10 predictions from the results. The **Pred\_Delay** variables contain the predicted delay times, while the **Delay** variables show the actual delays. Note that the **Pred\_Delay** values are not close to the actual **Delay** values, but are within the very broad confidence level for each prediction:
    ```
	head(delayPredictions)
    ```

#### Task 3: Evaluate the predictions
1.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code creates a scatter plot of predicted delay time against departure time. Note that, although the graph has a similar shape overall to the earlier one, the predicted delays show a bias to the low end of values. The regression line is very similar to that of the earlier graph:
    ```
    rxLinePlot(formula = Delay~as.numeric(DepTime), data = delayPredictions,
    type = c("p", "r"), symbolStyle = c("."),
    lineColor = "red",
    xlab = "Departure Time",
    ylab = "Delay (mins)",
    xlim = c(0, 2400), ylim = c(-120, 1000)
    )
    ```
2.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code creates a scatter plot that shows the differences between the actual and predicted delays. This graph emphasizes the bias of values in the predictions:
    ```
    rxLinePlot(formula = Delay - Delay_Pred~as.numeric(DepTime), data = delayPredictions,
    type = c("p"), symbolStyle = c("."),
    xlab = "Departure Time",
    ylab = "Difference between Actual and Predicted Delay",
    xlim = c(0, 2400), ylim = c(-500, 1000)
    )
    ```

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have created a linear regression model using the clustered data, and tested predictions made by this model.

## Exercise 3: Fitting a linear model to a large dataset

#### Task 1: Fit a linear regression model to the entire dataset
1.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code fits a regression model over the entire flight delay dataset:
    ```
	regressionModel <- rxLinMod(Delay ~ as.numeric(DepTime), data = flightDelayData,
	covCoef = TRUE)
    ```
2.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This statement uses the **rxPredict** function to make predictions using the test dataset:
    ```
	delayPredictionsFull <- rxPredict(regressionModel, data = delayTestData,
	computeStdErr = TRUE, interval = "confidence",
	writeModelVars = TRUE
	)
    ```
3.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code displays the first 10 predictions. Note that the individual predictions are more accurate than before and that they have a tighter confidence level. However, in some cases the confidence might be misplaced because the real delay frequently falls outside this range:
    ```
	head(delayPredictionsFull)
    ```

#### Task 2: Compare the results of the regression models
1.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code creates a scatter plot showing the predicted delays against departure time. Note that this graph is very similar to that generated from the previous model, and that the regression lines are almost identical:
    ```
    rxLinePlot(formula = Delay~as.numeric(DepTime), data = delayPredictionsFull,
    type = c("p", "r"), symbolStyle = c("."),
    lineColor = "red",
    xlab = "Departure Time",
    ylab = "Delay (mins)",
    xlim = c(0, 2400), ylim = c(-120, 1000)
    )
    ```
2.  Add the following code to the R file and run it. This code creates a scatter plot that shows the differences between the actual and predicted delays. The graph still shows a bias, but it is much less exaggerated than that created from the previous model:
    ```
    rxLinePlot(formula = Delay - Delay_Pred~as.numeric(DepTime), data = delayPredictionsFull,
    type = c("p"), symbolStyle = c("."),
    xlab = "Departure Time",
    ylab = "Difference between Actual and Predicted Delay",
    xlim = c(0, 2400), ylim = c(-500, 1000)
    )
    ```
3.  Save the script as **Lab6Script.R** in the **E:\\Labfiles\\Lab06 folder**, and close your R development environment.

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have created a linear regression model using the entire flight delay dataset, and tested predictions made by this model.

©2017 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode), additional terms may apply. All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are **not** included within the Creative Commons license grant. This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided "as-is." Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.
