# Module 3: Visualizing Big Data
# Lab: Visualizing data

### Scenario
You have decided that it might be useful to perform some visualizations of the flight delay data to give some ideas as to how and why delays might occur. You decide to generate plots of the delay times against flight distance. You consider that generating plots of delay as a proportion of total travel time might also be informative. Additionally, you want to ascertain whether delays might also be a function of the departure state (are more states inherently prone to departure delays than others?), and the day of the week. Finally, you decide to create histograms to see how bad weather leads to delays.

### Objectives
In this lab, you will:
-  Use the **ggplot2** package to generate plots of flight delay data, to visualize any relationship between delay and distance.
-  Use the **rxLinePlot** function to examine data by departure state and day of the week.
-  Use the **rxHistogram** function to examine the relative rates of the different causes of delay.

### Lab Setup
Estimated Time: 60 minutes
Username: **Adatum\\AdatumAdmin**
Password: **Pa55w.rd**

Before starting this lab, ensure that the following VMs are all running:
-  MT17B-WS2016-NAT
-  20773A-LON-DC
-  20773A-LON-DEV

## Exercise 1: Visualizing data using the ggplot2 package

### Scenario
You want to determine whether there is any relationship between flight delay times and distance traveled. You also want to see whether the state in which the departure airport is located is a factor in flight delays.

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:
1. Import the flight delay data into a data frame
2. Generate line plots to visualize the delay data

#### Task 1: Import the flight delay data into a data frame
1.  Log in to the **LON-DEV** VM as **Adatum\\AdatumAdmin** with the password **Pa55w.rd**.
2.  Start your R development environment of choice (Visual Studio or RStudio), and create a new R file.
3.  You will find the data for this exercise in the file **FlightDelayData.xdf**, located in the folder **E:\\Labfiles\\Lab03**. Set your current working directory to this folder.
4.  The ggplot2 package requires a data frame containing the data. The sample XDF file is too big to fit into memory (it contains more than 11.6 million rows), so you need to generate a random sample containing approximately 2% of this data. To reduce the size of the data frame further, you are only interested in the **Distance**, **Delay**, **Origin**, and **OriginState** variables. Finally, you also want to remove any anomalous observations; there are some rows that have a negative or zero distance which you should discard.
Use the **rxImport** function to create a data frame that matches this specification from the FlightDelayData.xdf file. You can use the **rbinom** base R function with a probability of 0.02 to generate a random sample of 2% of the data as part of the **rowSelection** filter.

#### Task 2: Generate line plots to visualize the delay data
1.  Install the **tidyverse** package and specify the **tidyverse** library. This package and library includes the **ggplot2** package and **dplyr**.
2.  Create a scatter plot that shows the flight distance on the x axis versus the delay time on the y axis. Give the axes appropriate labels.
3.  Overlay the data with a line plot to help establish whether there is any pattern to the data presented in the graph. Reduce the intensity of the points using the **alpha** function. This will help to show the frequency of delay times (more common delay times will appear darker). Also, filter outliers, such as negative delays and delays greater than 1,000 minutes (you can use the dplyr **filter** function to perform this task).
4.  Facet the graph by **OriginState** to determine whether all states show the same trend. Use the **facet\_wrap** function (there are more than 50 states and US territories included in the data).
Note: You might receive some warning messages due to insufficient data for regressing the data for some states. You can ignore these warnings, but you will see some states that don't include the overlay.

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have used the **ggplot2** package to generate line plots that depict flight delay times as a function of distance traveled and departure state.

**Question:** Does the regression indicate that there is any relationship between flight distance and flight delay times?

## Exercise 2: Examining relationships in big data using the rxLinePlot function

### Scenario
Having established that distance traveled does not seem to be a major factor in predicting flight delay times, you want to examine how flight delays vary with distance, as a function of the proportion of the overall travel time for a flight. You surmise that the overall flight time should be related to the distance traveled and hence show little relationship to the delay times, but you want to double-check this theory.

You also want to see how flight delays vary according to the day of the week, to establish whether this could be a factor.

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:
1. Plot delay as a percentage of flight time
2. Plot regression lines for the delay data
3. Visualize delays by the day of the week

#### Task 1: Plot delay as a percentage of flight time
1.  Import the data into a new XDF file with the following specification:
 -   Only include the **Distance**, **ActualElapsedTime**, **Delay**, **Origin**, **Dest**, **OriginState**, **DestState**, **ArrDelay**, **DepDelay**, **CarrierDelay**, **WeatherDelay**, **NASDelay**, **SecurityDelay**, and **LateAircraftDelay** variables.
 -   Remove all observations that have a negative distance.
 -   Remove all observations where the delay is negative or greater than 1,000 minutes.
 -   Remove all observations that have a negative value for **ActualElapsedTime**.
 -   Add a transformation that creates a variable called **DelayPercent** that contains the flight delay as a percentage of the actual elapsed time of the flight.
 -   Save the data in an XDF file named **FlightDelayDataWithProportions.xdf**. Overwrite this file if it already exists.
2.  Create a cube that summarizes the data of interest (**DelayPercent** as a function of **Distance** and **OriginState**). Use the following formula:
    ```
	DelayPercent ~ F(Distance):OriginState
    ```
Note that you must factorize the **Distance** variable to use it on the right-hand side of a formula.
Filter all observations where the **DelayPercent** variable is more than 100%.
Summarizing the data in this way makes it much quicker to run **rxLInePlot** as it now only has to process a focused subset of the data.
3.  Change the name of the first column in the cube from **F\_Distance** (the name generated by the **F(Distance)** expression in the formula) to **Distance**. You can use the base R **names** function to do this.
4.  Create a data frame from the data in the cube. This is necessary because the **rxLinePlot** function can only process XDF format data or data frames, not **rxCube** data. Use the **rxResultsDF** function to perform this conversion.
5.  Generate a scatter plot of **DelayPercent** versus **Distance**. Experiment with the **symbolStyle**, **symbolSize**, and **symbolColor** arguments to the **rxLinePlot** to see their effects.
Note: The legend on the x axis can become unreadable. You can remove this legend by setting the **scales** argument to (list(x = list(draw = FALSE))). The **scales** argument is passed to the underlying **xyplot** function.

#### Task 2: Plot regression lines for the delay data
1.  Add a smoothed line to the plot to help identify any pattern in the data (use the **smooth** type together with the **p** type).
2.  Break the plot down into facets, organized by **OriginState**.

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have used the **rxLinePlot** function to generate line plots that depict flight delay times as a function of flight time and day of the week.

**Question:** What do you observe about the graphs showing flight delay as a proportion of travel time against distance? Does this bear out your theory that there is little relationship between these two variables? If not, how do you account for any discrepancy between your theory and the observed data?

#### Task 3: Visualize delays by the day of the week
1.  Import the data in the original **FlightDelayData.xdf** file into a new XDF file with the following specification:
 -  Only include the **Delay**, **CRSDepTime**, **Delay**, and **DayOfWeek** variables.
 -  Remove all observations where the delay is negative or greater than 180 minutes (three hours).
 -  Remove all observations that have a negative value for **ActualElapsedTime**.
 -  Add a transformation that converts the **CRSDepTime** variable into a factor with 48 half-hour intervals. Use the base R **cut** function to do this.
 -  Save the data in an XDF file named **FlightDelayWithDay.xdf**. Overwrite this file if it already exists.
2.  The **DayOfWeek** variable comprises numeric codes (1 = Monday, 2 = Tuesday, and so on). Recode the **DayOfWeek** variable in the XDF file to a meaningful set of text abbreviations suitable for display as values on a graph. Use the **rxFactors** function to do this.
3.  Create a cube that summarizes **Delay** as a function of **CRSDepTime** and **DayOfWeek**). Use the following formula:
    ```
	Delay ~ CRSDepTime:DayOfWeek
    ```
4.  Create a data frame from the cube.
5.  Generate a scatter plot overlaid with a smooth line plot of delay as a function of departure time. Use the following **scales** argument to display and orient the labels for the x and y axes:
    ```
	scales = (list(y = list(labels = c("0", "20", "40", "60", "80", "100", "120", "140", "160", "180")),
	x = list(rot = 90),
	labels = c("Midnight", "", "", "", "02:00", "", "", "", "04:00", "", "", "", "06:00", "", "", "", "08:00", "", "", "", "10:00", "", "", "", "Midday", "", "", "", "14:00", "", "", "", "16:00", "", "", "", "18:00", "", "", "", "20:00", "", "", "", "22:00", "", "", "")))
    ```

**Question:** Using the graph showing delay times against departure time for each day of the week, which time of day generally suffers the worst flight delays, and which day of the week has the longest delays in this period?

## Exercise 3: Creating histograms over big data

### Scenario
You feel it might be useful to drill into the different causes of delay to see whether there are any patterns here. In particular, you want to examine whether the arrival state might be a contributing factor to arrival delays. You also want to determine whether delays caused by adverse weather conditions are more prevalent at particular times of the year.

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:
1. Create histograms to visualize the frequencies of different causes of delay

#### Task 1: Create histograms to visualize the frequencies of different causes of delay
1.  Import the data in the original **FlightDelayData.xdf** file into a new XDF file with the following specification:
 -  Only include the **OriginState**, **Delay**, **ArrDelay**, **WeatherDelay** and **MonthName** variables.
 -  Remove all observations where the arrival or departure delay is negative, or the total delay is negative or greater than 1,000 minutes.
 -  Save the data in an XDF file named **FlightDelayReasonData.xdf**. Overwrite this file if it already exists.
2.  Create a histogram showing the frequency of the different arrival delays. Set the **histType** argument to **"Counts"** to show the number of items in each bin.
3.  Modify the histogram to show the percentage of items in each bin (set **histType** to **"Percent"**).
4.  Modify the histogram again to show the percentage delay by state.
5.  Create a new histogram that shows the frequency of weather delays.
6.  Modify the histogram to display the frequency of weather delays by month.
7.  Save the script as **Lab3Script.R** in the **E:\\Labfiles\\Lab03** folder, and close your R development environment.

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have used the **rxHistogram** function to create histograms that show the relative rates of arrival delay by state, and weather delay by month.

**Question**: What is the most common arrival delay (in minutes), and how frequently does this delay occur?

**Question**: Which month has the most delays caused by poor weather? Which months have the least delays caused by poor weather?

©2017 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode), additional terms may apply. All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are **not** included within the Creative Commons license grant. This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided "as-is." Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.
