# Module 6: Creating and Evaluating Regression Models
# Lab: Creating and using a regression model

### Scenario
You have a perception (based on earlier visualizations and observations) that flight delay time might be a function of the time of day when the aircraft departed. You have decided to build a regression model that you can use to test this hypothesis. Due to the large amount of data available, you have also decided to cluster the data by departure time and delay. You will then use this cluster to make predictions about how long a flight is likely to be delayed, given the departure time.

### Objectives
In this lab, you will:
-   Create and evaluate clusters by using k-means clustering.
-   Fit a linear model and make predictions against clustered data.
-   Fit another linear model against the entire dataset and compare predictions.
-   Use logit analysis to assess whether a flight is likely to be delayed.

### Lab Setup
Estimated Time: 90 minutes
Username: **Adatum\\AdatumAdmin**
Password: **Pa55w.rd**

Before starting this lab, ensure that the following VMs are all running:
-   MT17B-WS2016-NAT
-   20773A-LON-DC
-   20773A-LON-DEV
-   20773A-LON-RSVR
-   20773A-LON-SQLR

## Exercise 1: Clustering flight delay data

### Scenario
You want to cluster flight delay data by departure time, but you are not sure how many clusters you should create. You need to establish an optimal number.

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:
1. Copy the data to the shared folder
2. Examine the relationship between flight delays and departure times
3. Create clusters to model the flight delay data

#### Task 1: Copy the data to the shared folder
1.  Log on to the LON-DEV VM as **Adatum\\AdatumAdmin** with the password **Pa55w.rd**.
2.  Copy the FlightDelayData.xdf file from the **E:\\Labfiles\\Lab06** folder to the \\\\LON-RSVR\\Data shared folder.

#### Task 2: Examine the relationship between flight delays and departure times
1.  Start your R development environment of choice (Visual Studio, or RStudio), and create a new R file.
2.  Create a remote session on the LON-RSVR server. This is another VM running R Server. Use the following parameters to the **remoteLogin** function:
    - deployr\_endpoint: **http://LON-RSVR.ADATUM.COM:12800**
    - session: **TRUE**
    - diff: **TRUE**
    - commandLine: **TRUE**
    - username: **admin**
    - password: **Pa55w.rd**
3.  Create a test file containing a random 10 percent sample of the flight delay data. Save this sample in the file **\\\\LON-RSVR\\Data\\flightDelaySample.xdf**.
4.  Create a scatter plot that shows the flight departure time on the X-axis and the delay time on the Y-axis. Use the local departure time in the **DepTime** variable, and not the departure time recorded as UTC. Add a regression line to the plot to help you spot any trends.
5.  Create a histogram that shows the number of flights that depart during each hour of the day. Note that you will have to factorize the departure time to do this; create a factor for each hour.

#### Task 3: Create clusters to model the flight delay data
1.  As an initial starting point, cluster the sample data into 12 partitions based on the **DepTime** and **Delay** variables.
2.  Calculate the ratio of the between clusters sums of squares and the total sums of squares for this model. How much of the difference between values is accounted for between the clusters?
Examine the cluster centers to see how the clusters have partitioned the data values.
3.  You don't yet know whether this is the best cluster model to use. Generate models with 2, 4, 6, 8, 10, 12, 14, 16, 18, 20, 22, and 24 clusters.
    - Maximize parallelism by creating a parallel compute context.
    - Register the RevoScaleR parallel back end with the **foreach** package (run the **registerDoRSR** function).
    - Use the **%dopar%** operator with a **foreach** loop that creates different instances of the model in parallel.
>**Note:** At the time of writing, there was still some instability in R Server running on Windows. Placing it under a high parallel load can cause it to close the remote session. If this happens, resume the remote session and switch back to the **RxLocalSeq** compute context.
4.  Calculate the ratio of the between clusters sums of squares and the total sums of squares for each model.
5.  Generate a scatter plot that shows the number of clusters on the X-axis and the sums of squares ratio on the Y-axis. Which value for the number of clusters does this graph suggest you should use?

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have determined the optimal number of clusters to create, and built the appropriate cluster model.

**Question:** What do the graphs you created in this exercise tell you about flights made from 6:01 PM onwards?

## Exercise 2: Fitting a linear model to clustered data

### Scenario
You have clustered the flight delay data, and now you want to fit a linear model that you can use to make predictions about flight delays. To test the predictions, you will use another subset of data that includes delay times and departure times, run predictions against the departure times, and compare the results to the delay times.

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:
1. Create a linear regression model
2. Generate test data and make predictions
3. Evaluate the predictions

#### Task 1: Create a linear regression model
-   Using your selected cluster model, fit a linear regression model that describes how delay varies with departure time. Include the variance-covariance matrix of the regression coefficients in the results (set the **covCoef** argument to TRUE).

#### Task 2: Generate test data and make predictions
1.  Create a test dataset that comprises 1% of the data from the original flight delay dataset. Discard all variables except for **DepTime** and **Delay**.
2.  Run the **rxPredict** function to predict the delays for the test dataset. Record the standard error and confidence level for each prediction (set the **computeStdErr** argument to **TRUE**, and set the **interval** argument to "confidence").
3.  Examine the first few predictions made. Compare the **Delay** and **Pred\_Delay** values. Pay attention to the confidence level of each prediction.

#### Task 3: Evaluate the predictions
1.  Create a scatter plot of predicted delays against departure time, for comparison with the earlier graph showing actual delays against departure time. What do you notice about the graph?
>**Note:** The graph showing the actual departure times and delays is based on a much bigger dataset. To get a fair comparison between the two graphs, regenerate the earlier graph showing the data for the entire dataset and set the **alpha** level of the points to **1/50**. Both graphs should look very similar.
2.  Create a scatter plot that shows the difference between the actual and predicted delays for each observation. Again, what do you notice about this graph?

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have created a linear regression model using the clustered data, and tested predictions made by this model.

**Question:** What conclusions can you draw about the predictions made by the linear model using the clustered data?

## Exercise 3: Fitting a linear model to a large dataset

### Scenario
You surmise that one reason for the underestimation of delay times could be that clustering a small set of values might not give you enough information to make accurate predictions (a set of 18 data points is an incredibly small amount of information on which to estimate values in a dataset containing millions of rows). You decide to investigate this possibility by creating a regression model over a much larger dataset.

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:
1. Fit a linear regression model to the entire dataset
2. Compare the results of the regression models

#### Task 1: Fit a linear regression model to the entire dataset
1.  Fit a linear regression model that describes how delay varies with departure time.
    - Use the entire flight delay dataset.
    - Include the variance-covariance matrix of the regression coefficients in the results.
2.  Make predictions about the delay times. Use the same test dataset that you used to make predictions for the cluster model.

#### Task 2: Compare the results of the regression models
1.  Create a scatter plot of the predicted delays for comparison with the earlier predictions and the actual delays. Include a regression line. What do you notice about this graph?
2.  Create a scatter plot that shows the difference between the actual and predicted delays for each observation. How does this graph compare to that, based on the results of the previous regression model?
3.  Save the script as **Lab6Script.R** in the **E:\\Labfiles\\Lab06 folder**, and close your R development environment.

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have created a linear regression model using the entire flight delay dataset, and tested predictions made by this model.

**Question:** This lab analyses the flight delay data to try and predict the answer to the question, "How long will my flight be delayed if it leaves at ‘N’ o'clock?" The linear regression analysis shows that, although it is nearly impossible to answer this question accurately for a specific flight (the departure time is clearly not the only predictor variable involved in determining delays), it is possible to generalize across all flights. What might be a better question to ask about flight delays, and how could you model this to determine a possible answer?

©2017 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode), additional terms may apply. All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are **not** included within the Creative Commons license grant. This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided "as-is." Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.