# Module 4: Processing Big Data
# Lab: Processing big data

### Scenario
Before continuing with your analysis of flight delays, you decide to reshape the data and add some additional useful information to the dataset. Specifically, you want to modify the data to standardize the flight departure and arrival times to use Universal Coordinated Time (UTC) rather than the local times that are currently recorded in the dataset. This will involve merging some data from another dataset then using the **lubridate** package to construct the dates from the information contained in the dataset. Finally, you want to add cumulative averages for the flight delay times for each route.

### Objectives
In this lab, you will:
-  Merge data from a second dataset into the flight delay data.
-  Write a transformation function to add variables that record the departure and arrival times as UTC times.
-  Create a transformation function to generate the cumulative departure and arrival delays for each route.

### Lab Setup
Estimated Time: 60 minutes
Username: **Adatum\\AdatumAdmin**
Password: **Pa55w.rd**

Before starting this lab, ensure that the following VMs are all running:
-  MT17B-WS2016-NAT
-  20773A-LON-DC
-  20773A-LON-DEV
-  20773A-LON-RSVR
-  20773A-LON-SQLR

## Exercise 1: Merging the airport and flight delay datasets

### Scenario
The flight departure and arrival times in the flight delay dataset are recorded using local times for each airport. You want to standardize all of these times to UTC. The time zone information that you need to do this is recorded in the separate airport information dataset. You need to join the flight delay dataset with the airport information dataset using the departure airport code that is recorded in the **Origin** variable in the flight delay dataset—and the **iata** field in the airport information dataset. You notice that the fields in both datasets are factors, but with different factor levels. The airport information dataset contains codes for 3,376 airports, whereas the **Origin** variable in the flight delay dataset only references a subset of these airports. Therefore, you will need to perform some refactoring before you can merge these datasets.

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:
1. Copy the data to the shared folder
2. Refactor the data
3. Merge the datasets

#### Task 1: Copy the data to the shared folder
1.  Log in to the LON-DEV VM as **Adatum\\AdatumAdmin** with the password **Pa55w.rd**.
2.  Copy the following files from the **E:\\Labfiles\\Lab04** folder to the **\\\\LON-RSVR\\Data** share:
 -  airportData.xdf
 -  FlightDelayData.xdf

#### Task 2: Refactor the data
1.  Start your R development environment of choice (Visual Studio, or RStudio), and create a new R file.
2.  Create a remote session on the LON-RSVR server. This is another VM running R Server. Use the following parameters to the **remoteLogin** function:
 -  deployr\_endpoint: **http://LON-RSVR.ADATUM.COM:12800**
 -  session: **TRUE**
 -  diff: **TRUE**
 -  commandLine: **TRUE**
 -  username: **admin**
 -  password: **Pa55w.rd**
3.  Examine the factor levels for the **iata** field in the **airportData** XDF file, and the factor levels for the **Origin** and **Dest** variables in the **FlightDelayData** XDF file. Notice that the two files use different factor levels for this data. There is even some minor variation between the **Origin** and **Dest** variables in the flight delay data, as shown in the following output:
    ```
	Var 1: iata
	3376 factor levels: 00M 00R 00V 01G 01J ... ZEF ZER ZPH ZUN ZZV
	Var 1: Origin
	329 factor levels: ATL AUS BHM BNA BOS ... GCC RKS MKG LMT OTH
	Var 1: Dest
	331 factor levels: PHX PIA PIT PNS PSC ... GCC RKS MKG OTH LMT
    ```
4.  Combine the levels in the **iata**, **Origin**, and **Dest** variables into a new set of factor levels. Remove any duplicates.
5.  Use the **rxFactors** function to refactor the **iata** field in the **airportData** XDF file with this new set of factor levels.
6.  Use the **rxFactors** function to refactor the **Origin** and **Dest** variables in the **FlightDelayData** XDF file with this set of factor levels.
7.  Verify that the factor levels in both XDF files are now the same, with 3377 levels in the same order.

#### Task 3: Merge the datasets
1.  Rename the **iata** variable in the refactored airport data XDF file to **Origin**. This step is necessary because the **rxMerge** command expects variables used to join files to have the same name.
2.  Reblock the airport data file using the **rxDataStep** function. This task ensures that the metadata for the renamed field is updated in every block.
3.  Use the **rxMerge** to combine the data in the two refactored files, as follows:
 -  Perform an **inner** join.
 -  Use the **Origin** variable to match the rows in each file.
 -  Automatically sort the data.
 -  Keep all fields from the flight delay data file, but only retain the **timezone** and **Origin** fields from the airport data file.
 -  Rename the **timezone** field to **OriginTimeZone** in the merged file.
 -  Set the output block size to 50000 rows.
4.  Verify that the flight delay data now contains the **OriginTimeZone** variable, containing time zone information as shown in the following example:
    ```
	rxGetVarInfo(mergedFlightDelayData)
	Var 1: Year
	9 factor levels: 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008
	...
	Var 29: OriginTimeZone, Type: character
    ```
**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have created a new dataset that combines information from the flight delay data and airport information datasets.

## Exercise 2: Transforming departure and arrival dates to UTC

### Scenario
You can now use the timezone information in the flight delay data XDF file to standardize the departure and arrival times to UTC. To do this, you will create a transformation function that operates on the data block by block. The processing for each block will iterate through the rows in that block and add two new variables named **StandardizedDepartureTime** and **StandardizedArrivalTime**. You will construct the departure time using the **Year**, **Month**, **DayofMonth**, **DepTime**, and **OriginTimeZone** variables in each row. You will use the functions in the **lubridate** package to convert the local time represented by these variables into UTC. You will then add the **ElapsedTime** variable to this value to work out the arrival time.

Performing timezone conversions is a complex task that **lubridate** makes appear very simple. However, this involves a considerable amount of processing. Therefore, you decide to test the transformation on a small subset of the flight delay data, comprising approximately 20,000 rows.

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:
1. Generate a sample of the flight delay data
2. Transform the data

#### Task 1: Generate a sample of the flight delay data
1.  Use the **rxDataStep** function to create a new XDF file containing 0.5% (approximately 20,000 rows) of the data in the flight delay data file. Use the following expression for the **rowSelection** argument:
    ```
rowSelection = rbinom(.rxNumRows, size = 1, prob = 0.005)
    ```
2.  Verify the number of rows in the sample by using the **rxGetInfo** function. The result should look like this (the number of rows and block sizes in your output might vary slightly):
    ```
	File name: \\LON-RSVR\Data\flightDelayDataSubset.xdf
	Number of observations: 21794
	Number of variables: 29
	Number of blocks: 9
	Rows per block: 2500 2534 2474 2428 2529 2598 2484 2461 1786
	Compression type: zlib
    ```

#### Task 2: Transform the data
1.  Install the **lubridate** package.
2.  Create a transformation function named **standardizeTimes**. In this function, perform the following tasks:
    - If the current chunk is a test chunk, then return immediately.
    - Create a new vector for holding the standardized departure time and add it to the list of variable values. Name the new variable **StandardizedDepartureTime**.
    - Create another vector for the arrival time. Name the variable **StandardizedArrivalTime**.
    - For each row in the chunk:
        a. Retrieve the departure year, month, day of month, time, and     timezone.
        b. Construct a string containing the date and time in POSIXct format: "yyyy-mm-dd hh:mi".
        c. Use the **as.POSIXct** function from the **lubridate** package to convert this string into a date. Include the local timezone.
        d. Use the **format** function to generate a string representation of the date converted to UTC format.
        e. Save the string in the **StandardizedDepartureDate** field of the dataset.
        f. Retrieve the elapsed flight time. This is an integer value representing a number of minutes.
        g. Add the elapsed time to the standardized departure time. You can use the **minutes** function to convert an integer into a number of minutes, and then use the + operator.
        h. Save the arrival time as a string in the **StandardizedArrivalDate** field of the dataset.
3.  Use the **rxDataStep** function to perform the transformation over the sample subset of the flight delay data. You will need to include the following arguments:
 -  transformFunc = standardizeTimes
 -  transformVars = c("Year", "Month", "DayofMonth", "DepTime", "ActualElapsedTime", "OriginTimeZone")
 -  transformPackages = c("lubridate")
4.  Examine the data in the transformed file and verify that the **StandardizedDepartureDate** and **StandardizedArrivalDate** variables have been added successfully.

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have implemented a transformation function that adds variables containing the standardized departure and arrival times to the flight delay dataset.

## Exercise 3: Calculating cumulative average delays for each route

### Scenario
You want to record the cumulative average flight delays over time for each route. This will help you to determine whether delays are getting better, or worse, or staying the same for each route. A route is defined as “all flights that start at one selected airport and end at another”. For example, all flights that have an **Origin** value of ATL, and a **Dest** value of PHX (Atlanta to Phoenix). You decide to use a transformation function to perform this task. Before you transform the data, you must first sort it, to ensure that the flights are recorded in date order.

The main tasks for this exercise are as follows:
1. Sort the data
2. Calculate the cumulative average delays
3. Verify the results

#### Task 1: Sort the data
1.  Use the **rxSort** function to sort the flight delay data by the standardized departure date and time.
2.  Use the **head** and **tail** functions to examine the data and verify that it has been sorted correctly. The first few flights in the data should be dated sometime on January 1, 2000; the last few flights should be dated December 31, 2008.

#### Task 2: Calculate the cumulative average delays
1.  Create a transformation function named **calculateCumulativeAverageDelays**. In this function, perform the following tasks:
    - If the current chunk is a test chunk, then return it immediately.
    - Create a new vector for holding the cumulative average delay and add it to the dataset. Name this new variable **CumulativeAverageDelayForRoute**.
    - You will calculate the cumulative average delay, based on the cumulative number of flights for the route and the cumulative total delay for the route. You need to record and save this information so it can be accessed as the function processes each row. To do this, you will use two lists named **cumulativeDelays** and **cumulativeRouteOccurrences** when you run the **rxDataStep** function. Use the **.rxGet** function to retrieve these two lists.
    - Iterate through the rows in the block and perform the following actions:
        a. Retrieve the **Origin** and **Dest** variables, and concatenate their values together. You will use this string as the key for the **cumulativeDelays** and **cumulativeRouteOccurrences** lists.
        b. Retrieve the value of the **Delay** variable.
        c. Find the current cumulative delay for the route in the **cumulativeDelays** list, add the value of the Delay variable, and store the result back in the **cumulativeDelays** list.
        d. Find the current cumulative count for occurrences of the route in the **cumulativeRouteOccurrences** list, increment this value, and store it back in the list.
        e. Calculate the cumulative average delay for the route by dividing the cumulative delay by the cumulative number of occurrences for the route, and write the result to the **CumulativeAverageDelayForRoute** variable.
    - Use the **.rxSet** function to save the **cumulativeDelays** and **cumulativeRouteOccurrences** lists so that they can be accessed when processing the next block.
2.  Use the **rxDataStep** function to run the transformation. You will need to include the following arguments:
 -  transformFunc = calculateCumulativeAverageDelays
 -  transformVars = c("Origin", "Dest", "Delay")
 -  transformObjects = list(cumulativeDelays = list(), cumulativeRouteOccurrences = list())

#### Task 3: Verify the results
1.  Examine the structure of the transformed data, and look at the first and last few rows. Verify that the data now includes the **CumulativeAverageDelayForRoute** variable.
2.  Use the **rxLinePlot** function to generate a scatter plot and regression line of average flight delays for the following routes:
 -  ATL to PHX
 -  SFO to LAX
 -  LAX to SFO
 -  DEN to SLC
 -  LGA to ORD
Use the following formula:
    ```
	CumulativeAverageDelayForRoute ~ as.POSIXct(StandardizedDepartureTime)
    ```
Use the **rowSelection** argument to specify the origin and destination airport for each route.
3.  Save the script as **Lab4Script.R** in the **E:\\Labfiles\\Lab04** folder, and close your R development environment.

**Results**: At the end of this exercise, you will have sorted data, and created and tested another transformation function.

©2017 Microsoft Corporation. All rights reserved.

The text in this document is available under the [Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/legalcode), additional terms may apply. All other content contained in this document (including, without limitation, trademarks, logos, images, etc.) are **not** included within the Creative Commons license grant. This document does not provide you with any legal rights to any intellectual property in any Microsoft product. You may copy and use this document for your internal, reference purposes.

This document is provided "as-is." Information and views expressed in this document, including URL and other Internet Web site references, may change without notice. You bear the risk of using it. Some examples are for illustration only and are fictitious. No real association is intended or inferred. Microsoft makes no warranties, express or implied, with respect to the information provided here.
